<h1>calamares-pacman-config</h1>
Configuration to install a pacman based system using Calamares + ArchISO

UNDER CONSTRUCTION! THIS FILE IS NOT FINISHED YET!

<h3>Pre-info</h3>
<ul>
  <li>This guide is written for Arch Linux. However, it should work with any pacman based system. In fact, the things that are not using
  Arch speciffic tools like pacman should work on any distro!</li>
  <li>A <code>$ <i>command</i></code> reffers to the command being run with normal user privileges, a <code># <i>command</i></code> means
  that it should be run as root.</li>
  <li><i>Italic</i> text means that the name can be what you want, but often times you'll have to adjust the config relating to it. However, just
  because something is not italic, that does not mean that you cannot cange it. It just means that I would not really recommend it
  unless there is a good reason for it.</li>
  <li>When text is written in angle brackets ( &lt;like this&gt; ), it means that the in/output can differ, for example with a vesion string.</li>
  <li>When you see something like "modules/unpackfs.conf", I am reffering to the modules directory in this repo (or rather the folder you cloned it to).</li>
</ul>

<h3>How to deploy</h3>

0. Most steps need to be run as root, so you may want to log in as root (not technically necessary,
but highly recommended to make shure all files are owned by root, to make shure everything
ends up in root's home to prevent permission problems in your own home folder and to save you fram having to type `sudo` or `doas` every time):
<pre>
$ sudo -i
</pre>
or
<pre>
$ doas -s
# cd ~
</pre>
<br>

1. Install all dependendencys:<br><b>Tip</b>: You can also use the `-git` versions from the AUR to get the latest builds.
<pre>
# pacman -S --needed archiso arch-install-scripts base-devel
</pre>
<br>

2. Get the archiso base system: 
<pre>
# cp -r /usr/share/archiso/configs/releng ~/<i>archiso</i>
# cd ~/<i>archiso</i>
</pre>
<br>

3. Clone this repo:
<pre>
# mkdir -p ~/<i>archiso</i>/airootfs/etc/calamares
# git clone https://github.com/SkyyySi/calamares-archlinux-config.git ~/<i>archiso</i>/airootfs/etc/calamares
# rm -rf ~/<i>archiso</i>/airootfs/etc/calamares/pkgbuilds
</pre>
<br>

4. Create a squashfs (it has to contain at least the essential packages, but if you want your ISO to work offline, 
add all packages here and remove them from modules/packages.conf):<br><b>Tips</b>:
<ul>
  <li>You can also add you custom files/directories (like your dot files) here.</li>
  <li>You can use custom names and directories here, but you will have to adjust modules/unpackfs.conf acordingly.</li>
  <li>You must include at least the <code>base</code> meta-package, because calamares will try to chroot into the system and run pacman from there.
  It cannot (unlike pacstrap) use the host's pacman installision.</li>
  If you want to make an offline install, you could, replace <code>base</code> with, for example,
  <code>amd-ucode base base-devel efibootmgr grub intel-ucode linux linux-firmware linux-headers nano networkmanager os-prober vim</code>,
  which will give you a minimal, tty (full screen terminal) only system.
</ul>
<pre>
# mkdir -p ~/<i>archiso-squashfs</i>
# pacstrap ~/<i>archiso-squashfs</i> base
# mksquashfs ~/<i>archiso-squashfs</i> ~/</i>archiso-squashfs.sqfs</i>
# mkdir -p ~/<i>archiso</i>/airootfs/usr/share/
# mv ~/<i>archiso-squashfs.sqfs</i> ~/<i>archiso</i>/airootfs/usr/share/<i>archiso-squashfs.sqfs</i>
</pre>

5. Create a package for calamares:<br><b>Tips</b>:
<ul>
  <li>You can use the provided PKGBUILD for this, just make shure that, if you use the stable version,
the version string (`pkgver`) at the top matches the last version on https://github.com/calamares/calamares/releases.</li>
  <li>Please note that makepkg will
refuse to work when run as root (as that would have many security issues), so you'll have to do this as a normal user.</li>
  <li>"version" refers to either "stable" or "latest", you can pick and choose. I would highly recommend the stable version, which
  also gets updated frequently while having far less breakages.</li>
<pre>
$ mkdir -p ~/<i>archiso/repository</i>
$ git clone https://github.com/SkyyySi/calamares-archlinux-config.git ~/<i>archiso</i>/<i>config</i>
$ cd <i>~/archiso/config</i>/pkgbuilds/<i>&lt;version&gt;</i>/
$ makepkg -sfrc
$ cp <i>calamares-&lt;version&gt;-&lt;pkgrel&gt;-&lt;architecture&gt;.pkg.tar.zst</i> ~/<i>archiso/repository</i>   # This is the file name generated by mkarchiso. It may look something like this: calamares-3.2.32.1-1-x86_64.pkg.tar.zst 
$ repo-add ~/<i>archiso/repository/archiso.db.tar.gz</i> <i>calamares-&lt;version&gt;-&lt;pkgrel&gt;-&lt;architecture&gt;.pkg.tar.zst</i>
</pre>

6. Adjust the pacman config:
<pre>
# cd ~/<i>archiso-squashfs</i>
# ${EDITOR:-vi} pacman.conf
</pre>
If you have $EDITOR set, it will open pacman.conf in it. Otherwise, it'll use vi. You can of course use anything you like.
Now got to the bottom of the file and add this to the bottom:</i><br><b>Tips</b>:
<ul>
  <li>You can replace the <code>file:///home/...</code> part with an online repo, just use https://example.com/path/to/repo or http://example.com/path/to/repo. </li>
  <li>The name in the square brackets must match the name you've givven your repository earlier. For example, "archiso.db.tar.gz" would be "archiso".</li>
</ul>
<pre>
[<i>archiso</i>]
SigLevel = Optional TrustAll
Server = file:///<i>home/USERNAME/archiso/repository</i>
</pre>

7. Create the ISO:
<pre>
# cd ~/<i>archiso-squashfs</i>
# rm -rf out work   # to remove leftovers preventing mkarchiso from generating a new ISO; this is only needed if you have built one before in the same directory. 
# mkarchiso -v -C pacman.conf .
</pre>

Once you're done, you will find your ISO in the out/ directory.
<br><br><br><br><br><br><br><br><br><br>
COPYRIGHT AND TRADEMARK DISCLAIMER: This project not affiliated or associated with, sponsored or endorsed by or in any way officially connected with Arch Linux and/or calamares.
